### Chapter 8: Egypt

>"Egyptology was a by-product of Napoleonic imperialism" (p. 144)

Champollion decyphered the Rosetta Stone in 1822 which included 3 languages: hieroglyphics, demotic, and Greek.

The Old Kingdom of Egypt was separated into two "nomes" in the north and south. They were united under Menes

It was believed "ka"--or the body's double--would survive as long as the body was preserved.

The largest pyramid was for Khufu, the middle was for Khafre, and the smallest was for Menkaure. Each one Old Kingdom Pharaohs.

Nomads from Asia (Hyksos) invaded and razed Egypt in between the Middle Kingdom and Empire periods.

| Period | Time |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| Old Kingdom | 3500-2631 BC |
| Middle Kingdom | 2375-1800 BC |
| Empire | 1580-1100 BC |
| Saïte Age | 663-525 BC |

Egypt in the Third Dynasty was a matriarch.

The rulers were from Asiatic origin while the citizens were from African origin.

*kohl*
: mascara

*de rigueur*
: required by etiquette or current fashion

>"Our virtues lie in the interpretation of our time" (p.169)

The priests used hieroglyphs first. The common people developed their own form of script known as demotic.

*effete*
: having lost vitality

*panta rhei*
: all things are in flux

Egyptian legend says Thoth invented science (god of wisdom) in 18,000 BC. The Greeks celebrated Thoth under the name Hermes.

The oldest mathematical treatise is the Ahmes Papyrus (2000-1700 BC) illustrating the capacity of a barn or the area of a field.

Egyptians determined pi to be 3.16.

Egyptians thought all diseases were caused by the foods they ate.

Egypt practiced totemism. Later, western Asia brought gods who were human.

Osirius was god of the Nile whose death and resurrection was celebrated once a year.

Ra, Amon, and Ptah were combined and worshipped as a triune deity.

Burying a body with scarabs represented the resurrected soul.

Amenhotep IV--known as Ikhnaton--came to power in 1380 BC and inaugurated the religious revolution that would destroy the Empire of Egypt.

Syria was being attacked by Hittites and Ikhnaton hesitated to help. Syria quit paying tribute to Egypt and Egypt's empire diminished.

2 years after Ikhnaton's death, his son-in-law--Tutenkhamon--rose to the throne and restored the ancient gods. Ikhnaton's name was removed from all monuments.

